# Where do data is Stored ?

- The kernel provides access to information about active processes through a pseudo filesystem that is visible under the /proc directory
-  Hardware devices are made available through special files under the /dev directory.while information about those devices can be found in another pseudo filesystem under the /sys directory.

- /proc/cmdline : Information that was passed to the kernel when it was first started, such as command line parameters and special instructions.
- /proc/meminfo : Information about the use of memory by the kernel.
- /proc/modules : A list of modules currently loaded into the kernel to add extra functionality.
- pstree : Shows the tree of the processes running in the system.
- ps : shows the details of the different running processes.
- ps --forest : It shows the details of different process running in ps tree format.
- To view all the processes running you can use ps aux or ps -ef.
- To view all the commands in the kernel sometimes it becomes very number of processes are too much. So, it is always advisable to redirect the output to head or less.
- top : shows the processes running at the instant of time when command is executed. we can always press shift + H to view the help docs in top command.
- __Different log files__ : 
    - boot.log : Messages generated as services are started during the startup of the system.
    - cron : Messages generated by the crond daemon for jobs to be executed on a recurring basis.
    - dmesg : Messages generated by the kernel during system boot up.
    - maillog : Messages produced by the mail daemon for e-mail messages sent or received.
    - messages : Messages from the kernel and other processes that don't belong elsewhere. Sometimes named syslog instead of messages after the daemon that writes this file.
    - secure : Messages from processes that required authorization or authentication (such as the login process).
    - journal : Messages from the default configuration of the systemd-journald.service; can be configured in the /etc/journald.conf file amongst other places.
    - Xorg.0.log : Messages from the X Windows (GUI) server.
    - journalctl : can be used to view the binary log files.

- / : The base of the structure, or root of the filesystem, this directory unifies all directories regardless of whether they are local partitions, removable devices or network shares.
- /bin : Essential binaries like the ls, cp, and rm commands, and be a part of the root filesystem.
- /boot : Files necessary to boot the system, such as the Linux kernel and associated configuration files.
- /dev : Files that represent hardware devices and other special files, such as the /dev/null and /dev/zero files.
- /etc : Essential host configurations files such as the /etc/hosts or /etc/passwd files.
- /home : User home directories
- /lib : Essential libraries to support the executable files in the /bin and /sbin directories.
- /lib64 : Essential libraries built for a specific architecture. For example, the /lib64 directory for 64-bit AMD/Intel x86 compatible processors.
- /media : Mount point for removable media mounted automatically
- /mnt : Mount point for temporarily mounting filesystems manually.
- /opt : Optional third-party software installation location.
- /proc : Virtual filesystem for the kernel to report process information, as well as other information.
- /root : Home directory of the root user
- /sbin : Essential system binaries primarily used by the root user.
- /sys : Virtual filesystem for information about hardware devices connected to the system.
- /srv : Location where site-specific services may be hosted.
- /tmp : Directory where all users are allowed to create temporary files and that is supposed to be cleared at boot time (but often is not).
- /usr : Second hierarchy
Non-essential files for multi-user use.

- /usr/local : Third hierarchy
Files for software not originating from distribution.

- /var : Fourth hierarchy
Files that change over time

- var/cache : Files used for caching application data.
- /var/log : Most log files
- /var/lock : lock files for shared resources.
- /var/spool : Spool files for printing and mail.
- /var/tmp : temporary files to be preserved between reboots.


- jobs : to see the commands running in the terminal.

