# Working with the text

- __cat__ : It is the short form of the concatenate. Used to create and view the contents of a file.
- __Pager Commands__ : 
    - more and less are the two pager commands which can be used to view the contents of large file efficiently.
    Where as less command is more advanced than the more command but may not be available in all distributions.
    while more is available in all distributions.
    - __Less__ : 
        - To open the help page for moving around in text file using less command press Shift + H. It will open a new window to show the different binded keys.
        - To forward search a text pattern press / and then enter the word pattern.
        - To backward search text pattern press ? and then enter the word pattern.
        - Use n to go to the next match pattern and Shift + N to previous match pattern.
    
- __Head__ : It is used to view the contents of a page to show first few lines of the page.
    - _head -n <number> <filename>_ : show the first number of lines of the file.

- __Tail__ : It is used to view the contents of a page from the last few lines of the page.
    - _tail -<number> <filename>_ : shows the last number of lines of the file.

- __Pipes__ : 
    - pipe | characters can be used to re route the data/output from one command to other.
    - examples - ls Documents | head 5 (shows only top 5 contents of ls Documents.)

- __Input/Output Redirection__ : Input/output redirection allows command line to pass the information to different streams.
    - __STDIN__ : Standard input, or STDIN, is information entered normally by the user via the keyboard.
        - It can be used to provide the standard input to very limited use cases as for tr commmad.
        - Example _tr 'a-z' 'A-Z' < example.txt > newfile.txt
        - above example reads the file exapmle.txt and convert all the characters from example.txt to upper case and redirect that to newfile.txt.
    - __STDOUT__ : Standard output, or STDOUT, is the normal output of commands. When a command functions correctly (without errors) the output it produces is called STDOUT. 
        - In redirection of STDOUT > overwrites the contents inside the file. To append the content inside the file >> can be used.
    - __STDERR__ : Standard error, or STDERR, is error messages generated by commands. By default, STDERR is displayed in the terminal window where the command is executing. STDERR is also known as stream or channel #2.‌
        - To redirect the standard error 2> type of redirection should be used.
    - Redirection is achieved using the arrow < or >.
    - To redirect both standard error and standard output both to the files we can use &>. 
    - To redirect both standard error and standard output to differnt files we can use 2> and 1> respectively. for example - ls Desktop /check_file > stdout.txt 2> stderror.txt

- _sort <filename>_ : commmand can be used to show the contents in the sorted order.
    - _-t_ : Option specifies the field deliminator. means what should be the deliminator for the sorting of the information. -t: take : as the deliminator field.
    - _-k_ : option specifies the field number based on which the sorting has to be happen. -k3 specifies that the 3rd field should be used for sorting.
    - _-n_ : Specifies the sort type. -n shows the sorting of numeric sort.

- _wc <filename>_ show the different stats of the word count on the file/files.Different columns has the following meaning : 
    - 1.Number of lines
    - 2.Number of words
    - 3.Number of bytes
    - 4.File name
    - It is also possible to get only the specified count sucha as with -l shows line count, -w shows the count of words and -c shows the number of Bytes.

- __Cut__ : cut command can extract columns of text from a file or standard input.
    - -d : command gives you an option to specify alternative deliminators.
    - -f : can be used to specify which fields to be displayed.
    - example : _cut -d: -f1,5-7 mypasswd_ : this examle uses : as the deliminator and select 1,5,6,7 columns to be displayed.

- __grep__ : grep command can be used to filter lines in a file or the output of another command that matches a specified pattern.
    - example : _grep bash /etc/passwd_ : search for the pattern of the "bash".
    - -c provides the count of the how many line matches are there.
    - -n option displays the original line numbers.
    - -v option inverts the operation means it shows all the result not containing the pattern match.
    - -i option ignores the cases of the pattern match.
    - -w option search for the patterns who matches only the whole pattern (means it does not considers the substring matches.)
    - grep -E '[0-9]{3}' passwd : shows the three digits searchs. {number} -> tell to repeat [] number times.

- __Regular Expressions__ : Regular expressions, also referred to as regex, are a collection of normal and special characters that are used to find simple or complex patterns, respectively, in files.
    - . : Any single character
    - [ ] : A list or range of characters to match one character. If first character in the [ ] is ^(caret) then it means character not in the list.
    - '*' : zero or more repeatition or apperances of any character.
    - ^ : first character in the match. where pattern must be in the beginning of line match.
    - $ : last character match in the list.
    - . : matches only a single occurance of any character.
    - ^,$ are also called as anchor characters.
    - To search for the pattern containing the meta characters place \ before the meta characters.
    - ? : Matches previous character zero or one time, so it is an optional character
    - '+' : Matches previous character repeated one or more times
    - | : Alternation or like a logical "or" operator
 
